title: "As the gaming industry has progressed, many attempts have been made to formalize and simulate games’ internal structures, especially in the field of “serious” and educational projects. Each of these models deserves to exist and serves their purpose. However, we should bear in mind that a particular model may not be suitable for your particular case. Before we take a look at my game design model, here are some examples of formalized game mechanics with some explanation and links to further information: The MDA framework — mechanics-dynamics-aesthetics. A game designer creates rules — “mechanics”; these rules start working in the game and start generating some kind of “dynamics”, which, in their turn, have an emotional impact on the player, and this is called “aesthetics”. The PENS framework — The Player Experience of Need Satisfaction model outlines three basic psychological needs: competence, autonomy, and relatedness, that lie at the heart of player fun, enjoyment, and the valuation of games. Machinations framework — Game Mechanics: Advanced Game Design is a great book, and I highly recommend it. The authors have created an entire graphic language to help you sort out any game mechanics. Björk and Holopainen’s Patterns in Game Design is an extensive library of game mechanisms with many examples. SSM — The System, Story and Mental Model. In this model, the author links mechanics (system), narrative (story) and what happens in players’ heads during their interaction with mechanics and narrative (mental model). Lens of Intrinsic Skill Atoms — turned out to be the closest thing to what I wanted to talk about in my article. The authors consider the gameplay from the atomic elements point of view — skill atoms. What happens in the player’s head during the game? 6–11 framework — this model suggests analyzing games in terms of their influence on 6 key human emotions and 11 basic instincts. Keep in mind that, while it’s important to know about the ways other people formalize game mechanics, their models may not be very applicable to your own experience. Each model is a mental pattern in someone’s brain that helps them make decisions. But this model is unlikely to work as well in a different person’s brain. So, the usual process is like this: someone accumulates knowledge, learns about someone else’s experience, then with all this in mind, comes up with their own highly personal model. And only once a personal, workable model has been created, do they see positive results. Hence, a warning: what I describe next is a model of my own devising. It may not suit you, and this is completely normal. However, some information here can help modify or improve your personal model, this being the purpose of the article, in general."

header: "So, speaking of creating a game model, what would we ideally want from it? It should help us define principles that can be used to solve design problems. It should also help us come up with principles which can help us solve design problems. To provide a simple game analysis algorithm that makes it easier to understand what is good in a game and why. The ability to segment individual parts of the game and analyze them separately: “Are these mechanics good or not?”. It should provide criteria for evaluating the quality of the game and its individual parts in order to answer the question “What is a good game?”. Possibility to derive a methodology for the synthesis of game mechanics: “How to make a good game?”. High predictivity of the model. If the model allows us to form useful criteria for product quality, we will be able to create good game loops already at the design/concept stage, or at least identify what is clearly not going to work. This will help speed up development, reduce the number of iterations, and generally increase the chances of success."

content: "First off, let’s try to think of each game we’ll deal with like some kind of a black box. Players somehow interact with the box, applying mental or physical “effort” in the process. If the game is good, the player is satisfied (although, the definition of this “satisfaction” is beyond the scope of this article.) For now, we’re more interested in the structure of our black box. How exactly do the players interact with it? What actions do they take? When interacting with a game, players repeatedly go through a cycle of actions, sometimes consciously, sometimes not. This is called a “game loop” and we can break it down into steps: Current game state assessment Current goal realization Multiple available actions assessment Development of actions set to achieve the goal, i.e., choosing a strategy (or making a decision) Planned actions implementation Receiving feedback through the game state change Return to the loop start The primary (but not the only) sources of interest and satisfaction here are the stages of choosing and implementing a strategy — it’s during these moments where players decide which gun to use (and against which enemy), then check their motor skills when taking aim with the help of the mouse/controller. Other stages have more of a supportive function, but are no less important. Developers can fumble any point of game loop design, leading to an overall poor game quality. With that out of the way, let’s consider each stage of the game cycle in more detail."
